---
layout: exercise
title: "Agents as probabilistic programs - readings"
description: "One-shot decision problems, softmax choice, and RSA." 
---

## 1. Making decisions about ethics.

In the main chapter, the scenarios the agent had to consider were very simple. Real-life decision-making is much more complex. Read "[Inference of intention and permissibility in moral decision making](https://mindmodeling.org/cogsci2015/papers/0199/paper0199.pdf)" by Max Kleiman-Weiner, Tobias Gerstenberg, Sydney Levine, and Joshua Tenenbaum.

#### Reading questions:
a) How do influence diagrams allow the agent to reason about actions? What do these allow that goes beyond what we saw in the chapter?

b) What theoretical questions was the model intended to explore? What modeling assumptions are tangential to the investigation?


## 2. Pragmatics and scalar implicature

One of the most well-studied pragmatic phenomena is scalar implicature, in which uttering certain statements implies that others are not true. For instance, if a teacher tells a class, "Some of you passed the exam," the implication is that not everybody did. However, this is implication, not the literal meaning of the sentence. To see this, compare:

* Some of you passed the exam. In fact, all of you did. 
* Some of you passed the exam. In fact, none of you did.
* Only some of you passed the exam. In fact all of you did. 

The first statement is awkward but not illogical. The second and third statements involve self-contradictions. 

Read @goodman2013knowledge, which describes how the Rational Speech Act (RSA) model that we saw in the chapter can be applied to the phenomenon of [scalar implicature](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scalar_implicature).

#### Reading questions:

a) How does RSA implement traditional Gricean notions? In what ways does it differ? (If you aren't familiar with Grice, read below.)

b) There are individual differences in how likely listeners are to infer scalar implicatures. How might this be implemented in the RSA model from the reading?

## 3. Adjectives & Rational Speech Acts

Start by reading @schmidt2009tall, which provides some background on the basic problem. Then read @lassiter2017adjectival to see how the Rational Speech Act model can be applied to this problem.

#### Reading questions:
a) How does the notion of 'informativity' help Lassiter and Goodman's model determine the meaning for gradable adjectives.

b) Do you think Lassiter and Goodman's model should be understood as a processing model that explains how people interpret gradable adjectives in real time? Why or why not? 

## 4. Generics & Rationa Speech Acts

Read [this chapter](http://www.problang.org/chapters/07-generics.html) from another WebPPL textbook that covers how Tessler & Goodman apply a model similar to the one in (3) to handle generics.

#### Reading questions:
a) How does the notion of 'informativity' help the model determine a meaning for generics?

b) How does this model reinterpret the relationship between what a sentence "literally" means, and what it implies?

## Extras

* **Gricean Theory**. The wikipedia article on the [Cooperative Principle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cooperative_principle) provides an excellent overview of Gricean Theory. "[Experimental pragmatics: A Gricean turn in the study of language](http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.233.1679&rep=rep1&type=pdf)" by Ira Noveck and Anne Reboul provides a very accessible discussion of psychological research up through 2008.

* **Pragmatics**. Many of the applications of RSA are in lingusitic pragmatics. You may find "[Pragmatics: Overview](https://booksite.elsevier.com/samplechapters/9780080442990/Look_Inside/10~Article-Pragmatics_Overview.pdf)" a useful primer. 

* **Expected Utility**. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy provides a [useful introduction](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/rationality-normative-utility/) to the notion of "expected utility", which plays a major role in many approaches to decision-making. 

